Crash Course: Economics
=======================

#1
--
Intro to Economics

Economics is study of people and choices.

Opportunity Cost:
The value of next best opportunity.

Assumptions in Econ:
a. Scarcity:
The tension between infinite wants and finite resources.

b. Everything has a cost.

Every solution have benefits and cost.

Analize our choices and get most from the limited resources.

Govt. use economical theories to guide public policies.
Policies are driven by incentives.

Incentives:
A set of external motivators that explains people's choices.

Macroeconomics:
The study of producion, employment, prices, and policies on a nationwide scale.

Microeconomics:
The study of how consumers, workers, and firms interact to generate outcomes
	in specific markets.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

#2
--
Specialization and Trade

Progress of humanity through out history:
a. Life Expectancy
b. Child Mortality
c. Income per capita

Industrial revolution leads to people having significant and sustained standard
	of living.

Specialization makes the country prosperous. It makes people more productive.
Trading enables to seek more opportunities than the area of specialization.

Specialization and Trade makes the world better off.

Production Possibilities Frontier (PPF) Graphs.

Individuals and countries should specialize in producing things in which they
	have a comparative advantage and then trade with other countries that 
	specialize in something else. This trade is mutually beneficial.

Countries cut off from world (Trade) are less economical countries. For e.g Iran

Self Efficiency is inefficiency and inefficiency can lead to poverty.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

#3
--
Economic Systems

Economic systems has three figures:
a. What will be produce?
b. How will we produce it?
c. Who gets it?

Two difference economic systems:
a. Market Economy
b. Planned Economy

Economy is defined by who owns and controls the factors of production. These are 
	major inputs required to produce stuff like land, labour, and capital.

Planned Economy:
Govt. controls the factors of production.

In both communism and socialism, there is economic planning, and the govt. helps
	decide what to produce, how to produce, and who gets it.

Command Economy: Extreme case of planned economy. Govt. controls everything.

Free Market (Capitalist) Economy:
Individuals own the factors of production.

Invisible Hand:
The unintended social benefits resulting from individuals actions.

Invisible hand of the free market is the idea that individuals and businesses
	meet society's needs when they seek their own self-interest.

Free market limitations:
a. Maintaining the rule of law
b. Public good and services, like road, bridges, education, and defense.
c. Market get things wrong, like pollution emission, regulating production.

Modern economies are neither completely free market nor planned. There's a spectrum
	of govt. involvement.

North Korea is command economy.
New Zealand is free market economy.
In the middle, we have the rest of the world.

The Circular Flow Model:
Modern economy is made up of 
a. Households
b. Businesses
c. Govt.

Businesses sell goods and services to households in the product market.
Households earn the money by selling the resources, like labor, to businesses in 
	resource market.
The business use the money they earn in product market to pay for resources in the
	resource market.

Govt. also buys products and resources.
Govt. get the money from taxing households and businesses, and borrowing.

There are no solutions, only trade-offs.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

#4
--
Supply and Demand

Market:
Any place where buyers and sellers meet to exchange goods and services.

Market involves voluntary exchange.

Price Signals:
The information that markets generate to guide the distribution of resources.

Supply and demand curve:
If supply is greater than demand, then it's a surplus
If demand is greater than supply, then it's a shortage
If supply is equal to demand, then it's equilibrium.

Four market behaviours:
a. Supply can increase
b. Supply can decrease
c. Demand can increase
d. Demand can decrease

Market concept should not be used during emergencies, ethical situations.
Market must be regulated.

Economists and politicians often refer to the interaction of supply and demand as
	laws.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

#5
--
Macroeconomics

The study of the entire economy as a whole rather than individual markets.
Such as unemployment, inflation, interest rates, and govt. policies.

Macroeconomics came after 1930 great depression.

Macroeconomists make predictions based on data, theoretical models and historical
	trends.

In economics, it's nearly impossible to control all the different variables.

Policy makers have three economic goals:
a. Keep the economy growing over time
b. Limit unemployment
c. Keep prices stable

Three specific measurements to see if a country is achieving above goals:
a. Gross Domestic Product
b. Unemployment Rate
c. Inflation Rate

GDP is the value of all final goods and services produced within a country's 
	border in a specific period of time, usually a year.

GDP doesn't include all the transaction occuring inside a country. For e.g
	a company buying another company. It also doesn't include illegal activity.

Real GDP, which is adjusted for inflation.

Recession happends when two successive quarters, or six months shows a decrease 
	in real GDP.

Depression is a severe recession.

Unemployment rate = # Unemployed people / # of people in labour force * 100

The official unemployment rate underestimates the problems in the labour market.

Three types of unemployment:
a. Frictional unemployment: The time period between jobs when a worker is searching
	for, or transitioning from one job to another.
b. Structural unemployment: Caused by lack of demand for a worker's specific type of
	labor.
c. Cyclical unemployment: Unemployment due to recession.

Goal is to have no cyclical unemployment.

GDP and unemployment rate are inversely proportional.

Inflation: An increase in a currency supply relative to the number of people using it,
	resulting in rising prices of goods and services over time.

Deflation: A decrease in the general level of good and services.

Inflation is measured by tracking the prices of a set amount of commonly purchased
	items, known as market basket.

The inflation rate is the percent change in the price of that basket over time.

Too much inflation is bad because it decreases the purchasing power of the money.
Deflation discourage people from spending since they might expect prices to fall
	more in the future. Less spending in the economy means GDP is gonna decrease
	and unemployment's gonna increase.

Components of GDP:
a. Consumer spending
b. Business spending
c. Govt. spending
d. Net exports

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

#6
--
Productivity and Growth

Why some countries are rich and some are poor?
GDP per capita is used to determine how wealthy a country is.

GDP of the country divided by its population.

GDP per capita is used to determine the standard of living. 

GDP is affected by
Natural resources
Govt.
Productivity: Ability to produce more output, per worker, per hour.

Factors of production:
a. Land
b. Labor
c. Capital
d. Human Capital

Connectivity = Productivity

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

#7
--
Inflation and Bubbles and Tulips

Purchasing Power:
The amount of physical goods and services that can be bought by a given amount of
	money.

Rise in prices = Cut in wages

Bubbles:
A market phenomenon characterized by surges in asset prices to levels significant
	 above the fundamental value of that asset.

Consumer basket is used to calculate inflation rate.

Consumer Price Index: A statistical estimate constructed using the prices of a 
	sample of representative items whose prices are collected periodically.

"Real": Price from the past adjusted for inflation.
"Nominal": Price from the past hasn't been adjusted for inflation.

Being rich is not how much money you have, it's how much purchasing power you have.

What causes inflation:
Demand Pull Inflation - too much money chasing too few goods.
Cost Push Inflation - Shortage of goods by producers.

Speculation: Trading a financial instrument involves high risk, in expectation of
	significant returns.

NINJA Loans:
No Interest, No Job, No Assets

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

#8
--
Fiscal Policy and Stimulus

Recessionary Gap:
A situation wherein the real GDP is lower than the potential GDP at the full
	employment level.

Inflationary Gap:
Real GDP exceeds potential GDP.

Both are bad for economy.

High unemployment rate leads to higher
a. Suicide rate
b. Domestic violence
c. Social upheavel

Fiscal Policy:
The way a govt. adjusts its spending levels and tax rates to monitor and influence
	a nation's economy.

The govt. alter the govt. spending or income using fiscal policies.

Fiscal policies acts as a stimulus to the macro economy of a country.

Stimulus has multiplier effect. Different policies has different multiplier effect.
Tax cut has 1 multiplier effect.
Construction of bridges and dams has 2.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

#9
--
Deficits and Debts

Budget deficit is the amount by which a govt. spending exceeds its income over a
	particular amount of time.

Govt. Income: Tax
Govt. Spending: Military, healthcare, pensions

Debt: accumulation of budget deficits.

Debt as a percent of GDP.

Our GDP grows every year, due to population growth and productivity increases,
	and our ability to sustain debt grows along with our income.

Default: Unable to return debt
When govt. default its debt, the investors who loaned the govt. money lose billions,
	and the govt. loses all credibility, and it causes a massive recession.

Debt Ceiling: Limit on the amount of national debt that can be issued by the treasury.
