Social Psychology
=================

WEEK 1
======
Social Perceptions and Misperceptions

Additional videos:
1. Quite Rage: The Stanford Prison Experiment
2. The Abilene Paradox
3. Obedience and an ABC News Primetime follow-up
4. PBS documentary on happiness
5. Secrets from the Science of Persuasion
6. The Power of Outrospection

Social Psychology Network

What is Social Psychology?
The scientific study of how people think about, influence, and relate to one
  another.
Social psychology is the scientific study of how people's thoughts, feelings, 
  and behaviors are influenced by the actual, imagined, or implied presence of 
  others.

Question?
"All things being equal, physically attractive people are seen as less intelligent
  than physically unattractive people"

Hindsight Bias:
or "I knew-it-all-along effect", is the tendency to exaggerate, after learning
  an outcome, one's ability to have foreseen the outcome.

Social Psychology != Clinical Psychology
For help with depression or other psychological problems, talk with a mental
  health professional or someone else you trust.

Benefits of Psychology:
1. Self-understanding
2. Social relationships
3. Intergroup relations
4. Group performance
5. Decision making
6. Life satisfaction

The Psychological Construction of Reality
-----------------------------------------
Do we share the same reality?
Perceptions are powerfully influenced by:
a. What we happen to be paying attention to
b. Contextual factors
c. Past experience
d. Expectations
e. Motivations and many other factors.

Change Blindness:
Change blindness is a perceptual phenomenon that occurs when a change in a visual 
  stimulus is introduced and the observer does not notice it.

Confirmation Bias
-----------------
It is the tendency to search for, interpret, favor, and recall information in a 
  way that confirms one's preexisting beliefs or hypotheses.

Consequences:
It can serve to preserve and strengthen social expectations.

Self-Fulfilling Prophecies
--------------------------
A self-fulfilling prophecy is a prediction that directly or indirectly causes 
  itself to become true, by the very terms of the prophecy itself, due to positive 
  feedback between belief and behavior.

Behavioral Confirmation:
It takes place when people's social expectations lead them to act in a way that
  causes others to confirm these expectations.
It is type of social self-fulfilling prophecies.

Beliefs will become reality.

Thin Slices: Social Judgements in the Blink of an Eye
-----------------------------------------------------
Social perception operate with surprising efficiency.
It is accurate when the judgements were based on thin slices of behaviour less
  than 5 minutes in length.

Social judgements can take place very rapidly, sometimes with surprising accuracy.
At the same time, they're prone to certain biases and distortions, and once our
  judgements are formed, we tend to lock into them.

What Other People Think of You
------------------------------
Social impressions are formed very quickly.

Week 2
======
The Psychology of Self-Presentation and Persuasion

Attribution Theory: The Whys and Wherefores of Behaviour
--------------------------------------------------------
Attribution is the process by which individuals explain the causes of behavior 
  and events

Understanding Attributions is useful:
a. It can help us avoid conflict
b. It can improve relationships
c. It can increase productivity
d. It can heighten job satisfaction
e. It can lead to self-understanding

Harold Kelley's Attributional Framework:
People usually explain behaviour in terms of:
a. Person -> Something about the person in question
b. Entity -> Some enduring feature of the situation
c. Time -> Something about the particular occasion

Causal attributions are based on:
a. Consensus -> Do other people respond similarly?
b. Distinctiveness -> Do other situations elicit the same behaviour?
c. Consistency -> Does the same thing happen time after time?

Salience and Causal Attribution:
In general, the more salient a stimulus is, the more likely it is to be viewed
  as causal.
Perceptions of causality are partly a function of where one's attention is
  directed.
Attention is in turn a function of salience.

Some Twists and Turns When Explaining Behaviour
-----------------------------------------------
People ignore consensus informations when making attributions.

The False Uniqueness Effect:
The false uniqueness effect is the tendency of an individual to underestimate 
  the extent to which other people share the same positive attitudes and behaviors.

The Fundamental Attribution Error:
It is the tendency for people "to underestimate the impact of situational factors
  and overestimate the role of dispositional factors in controlling behaviour".

East Asians are much less likely than Westerners to commit the fundamental
  attribution error.

Actor-Observer Differences in Attribution:
The classic finding is that actors are more likely to explain their behaviour
  as a function of situational factors than are observers.
The difference is just a bias.
Actors downplay dispositional explanations, but mainly when the behaviour or
  outcome is negative.
To actors, the situation is often most salient.
To observers, the actor tends to be salient.

Is the Attitude Bone Connected to the Behaviour Bone?
-----------------------------------------------------
Attitude can be different from behaviour.
Attitude-Behaviour inconsistencies.

Why?
1. Many attitudes relate to any one behaviour.
2. Many behaviours relate to any one attitude.
3. Attitude items tend to be more general.
4. Attitudes and behaviours are often elicited under different conditions.

Attitude and Behaviour are most likely to be related when:
1. They closely match each other.
2. The attitude is strong or potent. (e.g acquired through experience)
3. The attitude is easy to recall and has been stable over time.
4. People are made aware of themselves and their attitudes.
5. Outside influences are kept to a minimum.

Cognitive Dissonance and Self-Perception
----------------------------------------
Cognitive dissonance is the mental discomfort (psychological stress) experienced 
  by a person who simultaneously holds two or more contradictory beliefs, ideas, 
  or values. The occurrence of cognitive dissonance is a consequence of a person's 
  performing an action that contradicts personal beliefs, ideals, and values; 
  and also occurs when confronted with new information that contradicts said 
  beliefs, ideals, and values

Keys parts of Cognitive Dissonance Theory:
1. The act of holding two incompatible thoughts creates a sense of internal
  discomfort, or dissonance.
2. People try to reduce or avoid these feelings of dissonance whenever possible.

Keys parts of Self-Perception Theory:
1. Individuals come to know their own attitudes, emotions, and other internal
  states partially by inferring them from observations of their own behaviour
  and circumstances in which their behaviour occurs.
2. To the extent that internal cues are weak, ambiguous, or uninterpretable,
  the individual is functionally in the same position as an outside observer.

Self-perception theory focuses on social inferences and is attributional in nature.
Cognitive dissonance theory involves a natural tendency to reduce or avoid
  inner conflict.

Two flavors of Dissonance: Vanilla and Earthworm
------------------------------------------------
1. Predecisional dissonance: in which dissonance influences decisions.
2. Postdecisional dissonance: in which dissonance follows a choice that has
  already been made, and efforts to avoid or reduce this dissonance affect later
  judgements.
